\section{Structure}
\label{sec:10_structure}
In chapter~\ref{sec:state}, I will discuss technical Grundlagen that is
important to follow the rest of the work. The first part ~\ref{sec:20:technical}
I will discuss some details of the x86 microarchitecture. These details will
allow us to understand the attacks and what countermeasures to implement in the
remaining parts of the thesis. Section~\ref{sec:20:tee} will then discuss the
state of the art by reviewing related work. In this, I will look at how trusted
execution environments are implemented. First, I will review hardware
extensions followed by software solutions or software that enhances the security
of hardware extensions.

In chapter~\ref{sec:design}, I will explain the design of my implementation. In
particular, I will explain in~\ref{sec:30:system} the general design.
In~\ref{sec:30:attacker}, I will revisit the attacker model and what design
feature can be used to mitigate which attack.

Chapter~\ref{sec:implementation} will explain how I implemented the design
proposed in~\ref{sec:design}. I will look at specific parts of the
implementation that are important to fulfill the security guarantees. Moreover,
I will investigate what part of the design was problematic to implement.

In chapter~\ref{sec:evaluation}, I will revisit the implementation described in
chapter~\ref{sec:implementation}. I will evaluate the implementation in
chapter~\ref{sec:50:security} regarding how it protects against the attacker
model described in~\ref{sec:30:attacker}. Moreover, I will evaluate the
practical use of our design in~\ref{sec:50:security}.

After I evaluate the implementation, I will look at missing parts and how to
improve the implementation further. I will do all of this in
section~\ref{sec:futurework}, which gives an outlook on future work.

To come to terms with our results, I will give a short overview and summary of
the results and findings of our work in chapter~\ref{sec:conclusion}.
